I'm glad to see that you're practicing
social distancing that's exploring there
it's very good I want to thank everybody
for being here today this morning I
spoke with the leaders of the g7 g7
nations and they really had a good
meeting I think it was a very very
productive meeting I also spoke with our
nation's governors in this afternoon
we're announcing new guidelines for
every American to follow over the next
15 days as we combat the virus each and
every one of us has a critical role to
play in stopping the spread and
transmission of the virus we we did this
today and this was done by a lot of very
talented people some of whom were
standing with me and that's available
and dr. Burks will be speaking about
that in just a few minutes it's
important for the young and healthy
people to understand that while they may
experience milder cinders symptoms they
can easily spread this virus and they
will spread it indeed putting countless
others in harm's way we especially
worried about our senior citizens the
White House Task Force meets every day
and continually updates guidelines based
on the fast evolving situation that this
has become all over the world so all
over the world it's incredible what's
happened in such a short period of time
on the guidelines of the task force the
new modelling conducted by dr. Burks and
our consultation with governor's we've
made the decision to further toughen the
guidelines and blunt the infection now
we'd much rather be ahead of the curve
than behind it and that's what we are
there for my administration is
recommending that all Americans
including the young and healthy work to
engage in schooling from home when
possible avoid gathering in groups of
more than 10 people avoid discretionary
travel and avoid eating and drinking at
bars restaurants
and public food courts if everyone makes
this change or these critical changes
and sacrifices now we will rally
together as one nation and we will
defeat the virus and we're going to have
a big celebration all together with
several weeks of focused action we can
turn the corner and turn it quickly a
lot of progress has been made I'm also
pleased to report today that a vaccine
candidate has begun the phase 1 clinical
trial this is one of the fastest vaccine
development launches in history not even
close we're also racing to develop
antiviral therapies and other treatments
that we've had some promising results
early results but promising to reduce
the severity and the duration of the
Cynder of the symptoms and I have to say
that our government is prepared to do
whatever it takes whatever it takes
we're doing we're doing it in every way
and with that I'd like to just introduce
dr. Burks who's going to discuss some of
the things that we strongly recommend
thank you Thank You mr. president I
think you know over the last months
we've taken very bold action to stop the
virus from coming to our shores and
because of that we gained time to really
get together and understand the progress
across the globe of what has worked and
what hasn't worked we now need to appeal
to every single American so that they
can have their role in stopping the
spread of this virus we've talked about
things before about washing your hands
but we really want to focus on if you
are sick no matter who you are please
stay home if someone in your household
is diagnosed with this virus the entire
household should quarantine in the house
to prevent spread of the virus to others
the reason we're taking these strong and
bold steps is because we know there is
virus spread before you develop symptoms
and then we know that there's a large
group we don't know the precise percent
yet that actually is asymptomatic
or has such mild cases that they
continue to spread the virus if your
children are sick please keep them home
now to our older population or those
with pre-existing medical conditions
everyone in the household needs to focus
on protecting them everyone in the
household I want to speak particularly
to our largest generation now our
Millennials I have the mom of two
wonderful millennial young women who are
bright and hardworking and I will tell
you what I told to them they are the
core group that will stop this virus
they're the group that communicates
successfully
independent of picking up a phone they
intuitively know how to contact each
others without being in large social
gatherings we're asking all of them to
hold their gatherings to under 10 people
not just in bars and restaurants but in
homes we really want people to be
separated at this time to be able to
address this fire as comprehensively
that we cannot see for which we don't
have a vaccine or a therapeutic the only
thing we have right now is the amazing
ingenuity and compassion of the American
people we're appealing to all Americans
to take these steps to protect each
other and to ensure that the virus
doesn't spread these guidelines are very
specific they're very detailed they will
only work if every American takes this
together to heart and responds as one
nation and one people to stop the spread
of this virus thank you
thank you very much
dr. Burks so just to connect with what I
mentioned to you in previous discussions
in this room and dr. Berg said it very
well that in order to be able to contain
and curtail this epidemic to not reach
its maximum capability we have a two
pillar approach one of which I believe
has been very effective in preventing
the substantial seating and namely the
travel restrictions that we've discussed
many times in this room the other
equally if not more important is when
you have infection in your own country
which we do and you know I could read
the numbers but they're really
essentially what we've seen yesterday
incremental increases both globally as
well as in the United States what the
curve doing that
so therefore the kinds of things that we
do are containment and mitigation this
what we're mentioning now the guidelines
when you look at them carefully
I believe if the people in the United
States take them seriously because they
were based on some rather serious
consideration back and forth some may
look at them and say they're gonna be
really inconvenient for people some will
look and say well maybe we've gone a
little bit too far theywill
well-thought-out and the thing that I
want to re-emphasize and I'll say it
over and over again
when you're dealing with an emerging
infectious diseases outbreak you are
always behind where you think you are if
you think that today reflects where you
really are
that's not word speak it means if you
think you're here you're really here
because you're only getting the results
therefore it will always seem that the
best way to address it would to be doing
something that looks like it might be an
overreaction it isn't an overreaction
it's a reaction that we feel is
commencement which is actually going on
in reality so take a look at the
guidelines read them carefully and we
hope that the people of the United
States will take them very seriously
because they
will fail if people don't adhere to them
we have to have as a whole country
cooperate and collaborate to make sure
these get done thank you
if Americans really were to band
together I do with the White House is
suggesting how quickly you could turn
this point my favorite question asked it
all the time how many times Anthony I
think I asked him that question every
day and I speak to Deborah I speak to a
lot of them I just get the opinion so it
seems to me that if we do a really good
job will not only hold the death down to
a level that is much lower than the
other way had we not done a good job but
people are talking about july-august
something like that so it could be right
in that period of time where it I say
wash it washes through other people
don't like that term but word washes
through this the new normal until I to
the zone we'll see what happens but they
think August could be July to be longer
than that but I've asked that question
many many times yes today and looking
forward or living with so much anxiety
and so much fear facing uncertainty
right now I'm curious how are you
talking to your own family about this
how are you talking to your youngest son
do you empathize with this sense of
anxiety people are really scared yeah no
I think they are very scared I think
they see that we're doing a very
professional job we've been working with
the governors and the frankly the
mayor's local government at every level
we have FEMA totally involve him has
been you know usually we see FEMA for
the hurricanes and the tornadoes now we
have FEMA involved in this they've been
doing a fantastic job locally working
with people that they know because they
worked like as an example in California
in the state of Washington they work
with them a lot on other things and
they're very familiar so they're working
on it what you can do and all you can do
is
professional totally competent we have
the best people in the world we have
really the greatest experts in the world
and someday soon hopefully it'll end and
we'll be back to where it was but this
came up but it we came up so suddenly
look he was surprised we were all
surprised we heard about it we heard
about reports from China that something
was happening and all of a sudden we did
make a good decision we closed our our
borders to China very quickly very
rapidly there was a was a otherwise we'd
be in a furry as Estonia said numerous
times we'll be in a very bad position
much worse than we would be right now
you look at what's happening in other
countries Italy is having a very hard
time but I think that I think that what
we do and I've spoken actually with my
son he says how bad is this it's bad
it's bad but we're going to we're going
to be hopefully a best case it's not a
worst case and that's what we're working
for yes one is about your own tests the
other is about containment efforts is
the administration considering more
aggressive containment options like a
quarantine a national curfew well we
have that very much yeah we have that
very much and we are we've been pretty
aggressive we were earlier with Europe
but we were very very early with China
and other places and fortunately we were
and as far as containment here we are
we're coming out with strong suggestions
and you know it's becoming a little bit
automatic you look at people they're not
doing certain things for instance that
obviously not I wouldn't say the
restaurant business is booming in bars
and grills and all people are self
containing for to a large extent we look
forward to the day where we can get back
to normal are you are you considering
instituting a nationwide lockdown a
nationwide quarantine the NSC knocked
that down but there's still some
questions about how it all at this point
not nationwide but well there's some
point you know some places in our nation
that are not very effective there Paul
but we may we may look at certain areas
certain certain hotspots as they call
them we'll be looking at that but at
this moment no we're not
you had a virus test Friday night though
the White House doctor's office put out
a statement around midnight Friday
saying that no test was indicated so
when exactly was your test administered
well I had my test I was late Friday
night and the reason I did it was
because the I had no symptoms whatsoever
so the doctor said you have no symptoms
so we don't see any reason but when I
did the press conference on Friday
everybody was going crazy did you do the
test did you do the test so very late on
Friday night I did the test and he may
have put out or the doctor may put out
something at I don't know what time the
letter went out maybe it was put up by
somebody else but the results came back
I believe the following day and we
tested negative well I told them that
and I went totally by what they said the
doctors more than one they said you
don't have any of the symptoms they
checked what you're supposed to check
and that I didn't have symptoms but I
did it I did a test late on Friday night
and it came back probably 24 hours later
or something they sent it to the labs
came back later yeah please mr.
president you had a teleconference with
the nation's governor's today and even
that teleconference you told them if
they need things like respirators or
masks to try to get it on their own what
did you mean by that
they can get them faster by getting them
on their own in other words go through a
supply chain that they may have because
the governor is you know during normal
times the governor's buy a lot of things
not necessarily through a federal
government if they are able to get
ventilators respirators if they are able
to get certain things without having to
go through the the longer process of
federal government we have stockpiles
now or we're ordering tremendous numbers
of ventilators respirators masks and
they're ordered and they're coming and
we have quite a few at this point I
think Mike we have a lot but if they can
if they can get them directly it's
always going to be faster if they can
get them directly if they need them and
I've given them authorization to order
directly
mr. president one of the big weaknesses
in our health care system is search
capacity for medical facilities and I
wanted to ask what precautions what what
plane is being done to get China was
able to build hospitals in a matter of
days are you prepared to use the Corps
of Engineers or FEMA to start building
search capacity that we may need in a
couple weeks well first of all we hope
we don't get there and that's what we're
doing and that's why we're taking a very
strict look at this but we also are
looking at areas and not only looking
we're expanding certain areas we're
taking over buildings that aren't used
we're doing a lot in that regard we hope
we don't have to get there but we are
doing a lot in that regard
no one should worry about losing a
paycheck if they stay home when they're
sick but the House bill exempts
companies of 500 employees or more from
the paid sick leave requirement and
that's 54% of the American workplace why
is it a good idea to only would why are
small businesses to provide me well we
look into that and we may be expanding
that we are looking at that we want
fairness we want it for everybody no
we're looking at that through the Senate
because as you know the Senate is now
digesting that bill so we may very well
be hitting something
one of what he was asking how many
ventilators and how many ICU beds do we
have right now and will it be enough I
could get back to you with that number
we've ordered a lot we have quite a few
but it may not be enough and if it's not
enough we will have it by the time we
need it hopefully we won't need them
we'll give you we can give you a number
if it's important we'll give you another
day yesterday you said that this was
under tremendous control do you want to
revisit that statement we are going to
experience it experiencing this until
July or August five more months I'm
saying we are doing a very good job
within the confines of what we're
dealing with we're doing a very good job
there's been a there's been a tremendous
amount of the the the way they're
working together they're working
hand-in-hand I think they're doing
really a great job and from that
standpoint that's what I was referring
to yes it meaning the yeah if you're
talking about the virus no that's not
under control for any place in the world
I think I read I think I read now I
didn't know I was talking about what
we're doing is under control but I'm not
talking about the virus yes please
market took another hit today is the US
economy heading into a recession well it
may be when I think in terms of
recession we're thinking in terms of the
virus once we stop I think there's a
tremendous pent up demand both in terms
of the stock market in terms of the
economy and once this goes away once it
goes through and we're done with it I
think you're gonna see a tremendous a
tremendous surge we're not really we
hope we don't have to say we we think
that hopefully we won't have to do that
but it's certainly something that we
talk about every day we haven't made
that decision
doctors and nurses in this country are
telling us across the board they're
terrified of this virus of the fact that
they don't get it or the fact they might
take it home to their families what can
you say to assure health care providers
in this country that the federal
government is doing something today to
ensure that they get personal protective
equipment to protect themselves and
their family well I think the federal
government is doing everything that we
can possibly do we made some very good
early decisions by keeping people out by
keeping
countries out certain countries where
the infection was very immense I notice
a lot of people are talking about South
Korea because they've done a good job on
one side but on the other side
tremendous problems at the beginning
they had tremendous problems and great
numbers of death I think that we've done
it a fantastic job from just about every
standpoint with that being said you look
come out of way you look this is
something it's an invisible enemy and
but we are speaking all the time not
only with the people but also the
professional people the nurses the
doctors they have been doing a fantastic
job we are also working very much on
getting them the kind of equipment that
they need and for the most part they're
either they either have it or they will
be getting it but remember this we want
the governor's we want the mayors we
want them locally from a local
standpoint because it can go quicker
we want them to work and we we had a
great talk with the governors today I
think it was a really great talk there's
a tremendous coordination there's a
tremendous spirit that we have together
with the governor's and that's pretty
much for the most part bipartisan yeah
you just you told John that you think
this could wash through who said July
August you just felt speed when he asked
you about a possibility of recession you
said it may be I'm curious if there is a
recession when
well I don't I don't number one
determine recession I just say this we
have an invisible enemy we have a
problem that a month ago nobody ever
thought about nobody in a you know I've
read about it I read about many years
ago 1917-1918 I've seen all of the
different the different problems similar
to this that we've had this is a bad one
this is a very bad one this is bad in
the sense that it's so contagious it's
just so contagious sort of
record-setting type contagion and the
good part is the young people are they
do very well and healthy people do very
well very very bad for older people
especially older people with problems
my focus is really on getting rid of
this problem this virus problem once we
do that everything else is going to fall
into place yes last night that you were
going to put in a national curfew
watching right exactly me too your
people were saying this is a foreign
disinformation campaign if that's what's
going on are people messing with us on
the Internet well I don't know I mean
that I can't tell you if they are or not
I think a lot of the media heck actually
has been very fair I think people are
pulling together on this I really think
the media has been very fair I think it
could be that you have some foreign
groups that are playing games but it
doesn't matter we haven't really
determined to do that at all and
hopefully we won't have to that's a very
big step it's a step we can take but we
have not decided to do it Jennifer two
things on one on Airlines and we're Jeff
Bezos can you talk a little bit
specifically about what you'd like to do
to help the airlines first of all and
then second of all we heard that Jeff
Bezos has been in contact with the White
House daily can you say what he's been
asking for proposals well I've heard
that's true I don't know that for a fact
but I know that some of my people of as
I understand have been dealing with them
or with him and that's nice we have
we've had tremendous support from a lot
of people that
can help and I believe he was one of
them as far as the airlines are
concerned the airlines we're going to
back the airlines 100% not their fault
it's nobody's fault unless you go to the
original source but it's nobody's fault
and we're going to be in a position to
help the airlines very much we've told
the airlines we're gonna help them well
we're gonna be help me we're gonna be
back stopping the airlines we're gonna
be helping them very much very important
cargo we're gonna be looking at it first
only we have to back the airlines it's
not their fault
in fact they were having a record season
everybody was they were having record
seasons and then this came out and it
came out from nowhere so not their fault
but we're gonna be back in the airline
yeah continued to fall today support-
best thing I can jump to the stock
market is we have to get through this
crisis that's what I can do that's the
best thing we can do that's what I think
about once once this virus has gone I
think you're gonna have a stock market
like nobody's ever seen before I think
the question that I think maybe John
asked about until July the guidelines
are a 15-day trial guideline to be
reconsidering it isn't that these
guidelines are now gonna be in effect
until July what the president was saying
is that the trajectory of the outbreak
may go til then make sure we don't think
that these are is solid in stone till
July that would be the outside
you want Senate Republicans to change
the package that had passed that house
last week I think that make it even
better look they're working together
very well with the house they're working
very much in unison like the question
before they're working to only enhance
it and make it better and make it fair
for everybody and that's what we're
looking to do so we may go back and
forth with the house a little bit but
both will be in a very positive fashion
please these new guidelines say avoid
social gatherings and groups of more
than 10 people the CDC's recommendations
yesterday work for people to avoid
gatherings more than 50 people what's
involved and you and your team's
thinking in just the past 24 hours
and also what exactly do you need to see
well let me just have the professionals
thank you then thank you for that
question
so we have been working on models day
and night around the globe to really
predict because some countries in our
very early stage like the United States
we've been working with groups in the
United Kingdom so we had new information
coming out from a model and that what
had the biggest impact in the model is
social distancing small groups not going
in public in large groups the most
important thing was if one person in the
household became infected the whole
household self quarantine for 14 days
because that stops a hundred percent of
the transmission outside of the
household and as we talked about early
on it's silent we had another silent
epidemic HIV and I just want to
recognize the HIV epidemic was solved by
the community the HIV advocates and
activists who stood up when no one was
listening and got everyone's attention
we're asking that same sense of
community to come together and stand up
against this virus and if they everybody
in America does what we ask for over the
next fifteen days we will see a dramatic
difference and we won't have to worry
about the ventilators and we won't have
to worry about the ICU beds because we
won't have our elderly and our people at
the greatest risk having
be hospitalized Thank You mr. president
very productive call today with
governor's we talked about the new
rollout of the testing that we described
yesterday and drive through and
community-based testing and I know how
grateful the president is for the the
efforts that governor's are making and
now with the Admiral and the United
States Public Health Service as well as
FEMA we made great progress today and
coordinating those efforts but the other
issue that was raised with the president
today was personal protective equipment
and the reason I mentioned testing is
because one of the recommendations that
we have for states is that these remote
testing sites make a priority of two
groups one would be people over the age
of 65 that have symptoms we don't want
them to go to hospitals or emergency
rooms we want them to go to a remote
site in a parking lot or at a isolated
community location but the other
category is our health care workers we
want to make sure that our health care
workers have the opportunity to be
tested and using that new high
throughput test that the president
arranged with our major commercial labs
we'll be able to do that much more
expeditiously so we're putting a real
priority on our extraordinary health
care workers that are there at this very
hour coming alongside people that are
struggling with the corona virus and
people that are concerned that they may
have been exposed the other piece is
we're grateful that the legislation
passed by the House of Representatives
includes liability protection for n95
masks produced by companies like 3m in
Minnesota by Honeywell literally tens of
millions of masks are produced every
year for industrial purposes for
construction but the health experts say
they can be used just as readily to
protect healthcare workers from
respiratory ailments 3m and other
companies were not able to sell those to
hospitals but the president negotiated
with the Democratic leadership of the
House and Senate we've added a provision
to the bill that will literally from one
company alone add another 30 million
masks per month back to the marketplace
we're strengthening the supply chain and
health care workers around America can
be absolutely certain that the president
and our entire team are going to
continue to put the health of America
first and put first our health care
workers across this country that are
meeting the needs of the people of our
country have been sent out and how many
people can actually be tested so thank
you very much for that as we talked
about yesterday we're really entering a
new phase of testing at first we were at
the initial phase where the CDC
developed test was only available in
public health laboratories in the CDC
works very well for a few thousand tests
per day after it gets running we're now
moving into a phase that the big
commercial laboratories with high
throughput screening have availability
so as we talked about last week because
of the historic efforts of the FDA a
Roche test and as the president
predicted a thermo Fisher test we're
both produced last week under an
emergency use authorization 1.9 million
of those tests will be sequentially into
the ecosystem this week from the
information we have right now
1 million tests are available with all
the reagents everything ready to go
primarily at the reference labs called
quest lab core and a couple others now
it doesn't matter if they are not in
your neighborhood because every day when
people get tests a little white box goes
out in front it gets shipped by an
incredible distribution system the test
result and it's electronically reported
so these are available to people
nationwide we expect more and more than
1 million coming on board this week as
the reagents come up in his people with
the testing capacity validate that in
their own hospitals and other and other
places and in the future we expect at
least 2 million next week and at least 5
million the week thereafter there are
also a whole
growth of what's called laboratory
determined testing or laboratory derive
testing where individual laboratories
because of the regulatory deregulation
of the FDA can develop their own test
and start using them so if you're a CLIA
certified lab with complexity you can do
that so the point is testing is now
entering sort of what we normally do in
the healthcare system where big labs in
a high-throughput basis receive these
through normal channels so that part of
it is really underway how many Americans
have actually been tested you haven't
known there is a number I don't have
that number because I've been working on
setting up this distribution system so
this is where we are the state and
public health laboratories in the CDC
are published every day on the CDC
website the CDC gets feeds from lab from
LabCorp inquest and they get that on a
daily basis what is not being received
right now and ambassador birx is fixing
is that these homegrown tests in highly
complex labs don't necessarily get
reported in the system however as we
move forward particularly in the high in
the commercial phase of where we are
right now we expect about 80 to 85
percent of the tests to flow right into
the CDC we know them that's not good
enough for Ambassador Burk she wants 100
and we'll work on that I think just to
put it a different way of a lot of
testings have been going on and I don't
believe anybody's been able to do what
we're doing and what we will be doing
and let me just say that we talked about
the drive through testing yesterday I
want it to be clear to everybody this is
just another tool for states in local
public health systems and healthcare
systems to use it's not replacing
testing that it goes on in a doctor's
office or in a hospital or if you go to
your doctor and wants to get tested in
that office this is just another tool
that we're hoping the states to have and
again as we talked about this is modeled
on the FEMA base points a distribution
system optimized for testing we expect
this week we now have gear
being shipped right now today that will
be in over 12 states with multiple sites
many of many of states having multiple
sites to start augmenting the local
capacity and really providing the state
and the local people what they need as
another way for people to get tested
before that's never been done and
certainly not on a level like that and I
will say that I think I can speak for
the professionals that if you don't have
the symptoms if your doctor doesn't
think you need it don't get the tests
don't get the tests I think it's very
important not everybody should run out
and get the tests but we were able to
handle tremendous numbers of people
today New York said that he believes
that Hospital hospital capacity soon
will be overwhelmed and implored you to
call on the Army Corps of Engineers to
build temporary facilities to house
patients is that something we're looking
into it we've heard that we've heard it
from really two places there are two
places that have specifically New York
being one and we are looking into it
very strongly yeah I wash my hands a lot
probably maybe of anything more
certainly not less not not something I
want to do every day I can tell you that
it's you know it's a little bit of a
it's a little bit of good doctors in the
White House but it's a test it's a test
it's a medical test nothing Pleasant
about it in a tweet Governor Cuomo
should be doing more what's my think he
can't do much but I think you're right I
think you can't do more and you know
it's an area of the country that's very
hot right now I think New Rochelle and
place I know very well I grew up right
near New Rochelle I think it's a it's a
very now I think it's an area that has
to be tamp down even more because it's a
hotbed there's no question about it so I
think they can look at doing it but
we're getting along very well we've had
a very
in fact I noticed he made some
statements just now that the
relationship with the federal government
has been good that federal government
has done everything they've wanted us to
do but we can I think I think it's very
important that all of the governor's get
along very well with us and that we get
along with the governor's and I think
that's happening and being a bubble to
avoid the spread of the disease and to
protect the chain of command is that
something you and the vice president
should be doing and has there been any
talk about having to have a 25th
amendment but you know I will say this
that it's we're very careful very
careful with you know being together
even the people behind me are very
they've been very strongly tested I've
been very strongly tested and we have to
be very careful but everybody should be
vigilant we have to be vigilant this is
a question for you or for dr. Burke but
dr. Burke said that it is the
Millennials who are gonna lead us
through this and that now is the time to
look out for the older people in our
home older might be a state of mind not
necessarily an age so for those
Millennials of us who have parents who
are in their 50s 60s 70s
what is older what should we tell them
at this point well if I was dr. pouchy I
would tell you there's a physiologic age
and a numerical age so older people with
pre-existing conditions and what do we
mean by that you know significant heart
disease significant kidney disease
significant lung disease any
immunosuppression any recent treatment
for cancer any of those pieces in any
household now why do I think the
Millennials are the key because they're
the ones that are out and about and
they're the most likely to be in social
gatherings and they're the most likely
to be the least symptomatic and I think
we've always heard about the Greatest
Generation
we're protecting the greatest generation
right now and the children of the
greatest generation and I think the
Millennials can help us tremendously by
having a plus they need to communicate
with each other public health people
like myself don't always come out with
compelling and exciting messages that a
25 to 35 year old may find interesting
and something that will take to heart
but Millennials can speak to one another
about how important that is in this
moment to protect all of the people now
you could be 40 and have a significant
medical condition and be a substantial
risk you could be 30 and having come
through Hodgkin's disease or
non-hodgkins lymphoma and be of a
significant risk so there are risk
groups in every age group but the age
there's more Millennials now than any
other cohort and they can help us at
this moment mr. president the other day
you said that you were not responsible
for the testing shortfall very simple
question does the buck stop with you and
on a scale of one to ten how would you
rate your response to this crisis I'd
read it at end I think we've done a
great job and it started with the fact
that we kept a very highly infected
country despite all of the even the
professionals saying now it's too early
to do that we were very very early with
respect to China and we would have a
whole different situation in this
country if we didn't do that I would
rate it a very very I would rate
ourselves and and the professionals I
think the professionals have done a
fantastic job as far as the testing you
heard the Admiral I think the the
testing that we've done we we've really
took over an obsolete system or put it
maybe in a different way a system that
wasn't meant to do anything like this we
took it over and we're doing something
that's never been done in this country
and I think that we are doing very well
we took the system we worked with the
system we had and we broke down the
system purposely we broke it down in
order to do what we're doing now and
within a short period of time and even
now what
tremendous numbers of people and
ultimately you're saying it will be what
it will be up to how many people will be
able to test we certainly expect with
the high throughput testing that that's
no longer a barrier the barrier is
actually doing the test on a person and
I'm sure as the president will would
inform you in order to do the test a
healthcare provider needs to dress in
full personal protective equipment full
personal protective equipment and
there's a swab that's put in the back of
the nose all the way to the back of the
throat it's called a nasopharyngeal swab
which is then put in media the next
person who has to get tested that
healthcare provider has to change all
the personal protective equipment when
you put that in it's highly likely a
person coughs or sneezes so you're at
risk so that's what we're trying to fix
now by the mobile platforms by all the
things we're doing is to enable sort of
high throughput of this swabbing and
we're doing some technological things
too that might be breakthroughs to make
it much much faster but we certainly
expect that from thousands of people per
day we will we will be at the tens of
thousands of people per day this week
according to those who are normally but
I think when you hear the you know this
has never been done before in this
country if you look back you know take a
look at some of the things that took
place in oh 9 or 11 or whatever it may
have been
they never did nobody's ever done
anything like what we're doing now I
will also say Admiral I think we can say
that we're also getting this ready for
the future so that when we have a future
problem if and when and hopefully we
don't have anything like this but if
there is we're gonna be very we're gonna
be starting off from a much higher
plateau because we were at a very very
low base we had a system that was not
meant for this it was a smaller system
it was meant for a much different
purpose and for that purpose it was fine
but not for this purpose so we broke
down the system and now we have
something that's going to be and and is
very special and is ready for future
problems I think we can say that very
strongly yes
are you two shutting down America's
northern border with Canada and could
you also speak to the fact about the
elections that are supposed to be taking
place tomorrow is it it your advice at
those states postpone those elections
well I'd leave that up to the states
it's a big thing postponing an election
I think to me that really goes to the
heart of what we're all about I think
the postponing an election is a very
tough thing I know they're doing because
they've been in touch with us they're
doing it very carefully they're
spreading people out very at great
distances as you can see and I think
they'll do it very safely I hope they do
it very safely but I think postponing
elections is a very it's not a very good
thing they have lots of room and a lot
of the electoral places and I think that
they will do it very well but I think
postponing is unnecessary think about it
we think about it if we don't have to do
it that'll be good we have very strong
emergency powers when it comes to
something like this both on the southern
and the northern borders and we we are
talking about different things but we'll
see right now we have not decided to do
that Steve thank you for that question
the vaccine candidate that was given the
first injections for the first person
took place today you might recall when
we first thought it I said it would be
two to three months and if we did that
that would be the fastest we've ever
gone from obtaining the sequence to
being able to do a phase one trial this
has been now 65 days which I believe is
the record what it is it's a trial of 45
normal individuals between the ages of
18 and 55 the trial is taking place in
Seattle there will be two injections one
at zero day first one then 28 days there
will be three separate doses 25
milligrams 100 milligrams 250 milligrams
and the individuals will be followed for
one year both for safety and whether it
induces the kind of response that we
predict would
protective and that's exactly what I've
been telling this group over and over
again so what's happened the first
injection was today someone who may have
felt sick but then feels better so you
had symptoms but no you no longer do
your fevers going away how long would
you stay home after that point that's
not clear for me well if you are if you
are positive for the infection if you
have corona virus it is less how you
feel then whether or not you're still
shedding virus so the general issue
about letting people out of a facility
who for example a hospital or whatever
who have been infected
you need to negative cultures the same
way that was just described 24 hours
apart the market the market will take
care of itself the market will be very
strong as soon as we get rid of the
virus the pregnancy was one of those
underlying conditions do we say that -
there's very little data and pregnant
women I think I about a week ago I said
that reports that came in from China
from the Chinese CDC of the nine women
who were documented to be pregnant and
have corona virus in their last try
semester delivered healthy children and
they themselves were healthy and
recovered that is our total sample size
and we will be getting more data from
countries while countries are in the
midst of this crisis like Italy it's I
not to bother them frequently should get
us their data we try to get it just
weekly from the countries that are in
the midst of responding to the epidemics
so that their focus is on their
individuals in their country
governor Oklahoma have been saying
encouraging people to go out to
restaurants which goes directly against
what this advice and your guidelines
says you know I haven't heard that I
haven't heard that from Devon or anybody
else stop saying that but I have to see
what they said but right now we don't
have an order one way or the other we
don't have an order but I think it's
probably better that you don't
especially in certain areas Oklahoma
doesn't have a tremendous problem okay
the governor of first do what the
professionals are saying that's what
you're saying
I don't know who would be best to answer
this question maybe secretaries or
doctor pouchy schools school districts
across the country are closing down yet
for the most part daycare centers remain
open and considering that children can
sometimes be asymptomatic carriers again
and go home to older individuals are
there any recommendations about daycare
centers in in in the original guidelines
as they were they were presented it was
schools not daycare I think it's very
important we should probably if you have
not discuss that go back and discuss
that in some detail about whether or not
that's equivalent to school it's a good
question the question about the sort of
underlying public health strategy behind
some of these guidelines telling people
to avoid restaurants and bars is a
different thing than saying that bars
and restaurants should shut down over
the next 15 days so why was it seen as
being imprudent or not not necessary to
take that additional step offer that
additional guidance I think we have to
say the data had that has been coming
out and I'm sure you're all up to the
date up to date on how long the virus
lives on hard surfaces and that has been
our concern over the last two weeks I'm
sorry good I just want to read there's a
yes
he was my mentor so I'm going to have to
let him speak the small print gear it's
really some old friends in states with
evidence of community transmission baws
restaurants food courts gyms and other
indoor and outdoor venues where groups
of people congregate should be closed
are you telling governors in those
states then to close all their
restaurants well we haven't said that
yet one recommending but we're
recommending things we haven't gone to
that step yet that could happen but we
haven't gone there yet please if you've
got the ten percent maximum of you know
guideline in a practical sense can you
have rallies can you primaries shortly
gather moment well hopefully there's
gonna last through and hopefully that
will have everybody will be going to
restaurants and plying and being on
cruise ships and all of these different
things that we do and it will very very
hopefully be in a fairly quick period of
time but where we're taking a tough
stance we may make certain other
decisions we may enhance those decisions
we're going to find out as per the
question that you were asking some of
those decisions may be had so how about
one more any reason to believe that they
were trying to hack into the system and
gather information donuts issues and
also is there any reason so were they
trying to have to get information or in
also way do you have any reason to think
that it could have been Quran Russia do
you have any any reason to believe is a
foreigner so in the previous 24 hours we
saw a great deal of enhanced activity
with relation to the HHS HHS computer
systems and website fortunately we have
extremely strong barriers we had no
penetration into our networks we had no
degradation of the functioning of our
networks we had no limitation of our
capacity for people to telework we've
taken very strong defensive actions the
source of this enhanced activity remains
under investigation so I wouldn't want
to speculate on the source of it but
there was no data breach or no
degradation in terms of our ability to
function and serve our important mission
here
could you speak to that one thing Mike
just said it's very important to get out
that this is for the next what we're
talking about much of what we're talking
about is for the next 15 days my good
I've not been tested yet I'm in regular
consultation with the White House
physician and he said I've not been
exposed to anyone for any period of time
they heard the coronavirus and that my
wife and I have no symptoms but we're
checking our temperature regularly every
day and we'll continue to follow
guidance which i think may be a good a
good place to land at the end of the day
and that is as we expand testing rapidly
around the country through the new
public-private partnership that the
president facilitated we want the tests
to be available for people who have
symptoms people that who have symptoms
and are in vulnerable populations and
our health care workers to make sure
that they can have the peace of mind
that they're doing their jobs and
they're properly protected and so our
best counsel the council the experts is
if you have a question call your doctor
call your health care provider ask
whether or not you should be tested and
that's what my family is doing as well
let me just emphasize one more point if
I can the president asked the taskforce
to continuously review the data and the
information that we have not only in
this country but from around the world
to give the best guidance to state
leadership and local health care
leadership and all of the American
people about how to keep themselves
their family and their community safe
this guidance for the next 15 days is
what our experts say is the best
opportunity we have to lower the
infection rate over the entire course of
the coronavirus just as the president
did by suspending travel from China just
as he did with travel advisories and
screening from Italy and South Korea and
just as we've done with Europe and and
at midnight tonight with the UK and
Ireland will continue to take very
decisive steps
to lower the spread of the coronavirus
but we want every American to know and
we would ask all of all of you in the
media just spread the word of the
American people that this is advice on
behalf of the President of the United
States to every American what you can do
over the next 15 days to prevent the
spread of the corona virus and we're
calling on every American to do your
part because together we'll get through
this and we'll find our way forward what
was the upshot they're still gonna be
able to meet that Camp David well it
looks like it when are you confident in
their responses they're in a position
that some of them are in a rough
position if you look at a couple of them
and some are heading toward pretty rough
territory we had a very good conference
it was a teleconference everybody was on
the phone every leader and almost a
hundred percent was devoted to the
subject that we're talking about today
and they are working very hard and it
you know they're very concerned
obviously but they're working very hard
but I would say just about all of it was
Steve all of it was devoted to what
we're talking so far it seems we have it
we didn't even discuss that still a ways
off but it was a very good discussion
and they have there's a great comradery
there's a great togetherness I think it
was I think I can say that very very
strongly thank you all very much thank
you thank you
[Music]